Hére nĩ tege izérimĩmĩ qege lórumãlu, dzérenĩ þadórumãdórumãgo tege nẽ́rili sórumũ ivézimĩmĩ.
"As we learn this language, many students want new stories."

Mṍzu tóralugo nẽ́rili þadóravã idémẽnĩdérimĩmĩ.
"The horror movie finalized the (evaluation of the) new system."

Mãys lúmũralu kóvunũnũ idarimĩmĩ.
"Corn grows beautifully in the garden."

taħarumũshgo éleli mẽlimẽli ubúrumũmũ kóvunũnũ.
"The hawk hid the swan's feathers in the garden."

Héré nĩẽ nãrugu kénãrã idérimĩdérimĩmĩ, mṍgogo þagórumã imẽ́rimĩgemẽ.
"If I master the difficult algorithm, the world will regain hope."

Þadózamã falumũnãrumã bvéri kómũrugómũru hólurulu tógoru izamĩmĩ.
"Computers are helpful tools for people who enjoy gaming."

Kóvunũdórugo nãrugu þadézari udórumõdórumãmũ.
"The gardener finished the difficult homework."

Palumũdórumãgo mãlalumã ugólomũ.
"The athlete reached for the golden ring."

Þadórumãgo nẽ́rilu mãnãru uvalumũmũ.
"The student likes the new song."

panũrunũ límẽri dzúrã lúmũralu izamĩmĩ.
"The music in the library is very beautiful."

Hére nĩli þagérige dzalumũzólunũ umãzumãmũ, nĩẽ kavuru dzéranĩ inĩ́zimĩmĩ.
"When my friend eats lunch, I always drink coffee."

dzúragúrago þadórumãdórumã mṍlurumṍluru ubarumãzumũ.
The teacher made the students have dictionaries.

nĩẽ kavuru ulóradarumũmũ.
"I reached for the coffee."

Þaglízamĩ kélirinãge falurunãdórumã nṍduru-li i-lémãrimĩmĩ.
"The shimmering stars distracted the astronomer from his notebook."

Þadórumãgo tézimĩli tézimĩ tógoru ulóradarumũmũ.
"The student reached for the silver metal tool."

Tímẽge téziri inĩzimĩ lú?
"Are you drinking tea?"

Lamõrudórumãgo qalalã palumĩmã apalumũmũ sélimĩli fólumũ bvónãlu.
"The musician plays a grand instrument to evoke fated joy."

Þadarumõdórumãgo bvézi tógorudógoru idézimĩmĩ túrumũ igélimĩgemẽ.
"The hunter needs ten tools to find the bird."

Lamõrudóru laradago palumũmã ulóradarumũmũ.
"The musician's hand reached for the instrument."

Nĩ tege nẽ́rivarinĩ túrumũtúrumũ bvanũguvalu amẽ́rimĩ ilímĩrimĩ.
"We look forward to seeing the birds return to Vancouver in the future."

Fénãrã ugóruamũmũ sérimĩnĩzéradarimãgo teli nẽ́rivari izérimĩmĩ.
"The scientist who creates the algorithm ensures our future."

Héré qérimẽ lízérã udórumõmũ, þadóruvã inẽ́rimĩgemẽ.
"If the calculation hits zero, the program will end."

Þadórumãgo mĩ́nĩri idézimĩmĩ, térenĩ igérimĩli.
"The student needs a laptop to calculate the data."

Mĩ́nĩrige nĩẽ idórumũmũ nĩli súmũrunũ lúzumũmũ.
"The laptop that I used charged in my bed."

taħarumũshlu nĩ́mã þabóħrunũ hére xórumõ izamĩmĩ.
"The shadow of the hawk is black and serious."

Palumũdórumãgo fazumã bvózumũlu nãrugu túramũ idérimĩdérimĩ izarimĩmĩ.
"The athlete struggled to finish the difficult hike before the storm."

Kalalã þadózamã bvóramũgo þadórumãdórumãgo ulómãmũnõ izérimĩmĩ.
"A grand evolution of the game ensured the students did not procrastinate."

Hére nãrumãnãrumãgo tege ladamṍluruladamṍluru ielirízimĩnẽ, teli panũru sam izamĩmĩ.
"When people don’t read books anymore, our library is empty."

Mṹranũsparazúradórumãgo þadórumã mṹranũzalumã azalumũzumũ.
"The doctor made the sick child take the medicine."

Hére nĩ nĩli súmũralu þabóromũmũ, mãys azalumũgomõ ivézimĩmĩ.
"When I go home, I want to eat corn."

Sérimĩli teli xóronũnũ kómũrugómũru ko tege dzórumãlu tógoru izamĩmĩ.
"Computers are an important tool in our field of study."

Kogonõvaruzulu þadóruvã lízérã qérimĩnĩ dzéranĩrã igérimĩgemẽ.
"Otherwise, the program will often calculate the zero value."

tamõdórumãgo tóralunãrumãgo bvórã dzérimĩ dzórazalu idémẽnĩmĩ.
"The critic judged the actor's raw energy to be extraordinary."

Nĩẽ tímẽge xarolugharon idémẽnĩmĩ, héré tímẽ kavuru inãzimĩmĩ.
"I judge your rage (to be) because you refused coffee."

Sérimĩnĩzéradarimãge mṹranũzalumã igélimĩmĩ dzérimĩnẽli þabarunã bvéri.
"The scientist found medicine for the weak animal."

Xélirili falurunãdórumãgo bvarigadi kélirinãvélirinã karunũlu pélanĩge ivérimãmĩ.
"The honest astronomer sees eighty stars with the heavy telescope."

nĩ-e mṹranũzalumã i-dólumũ-mĩ mṹranũspara-nũ


Kalã panũru bvérizimãge þadórumãnũ sélimĩli dzarumũ bvónãmũ.
"The grand library scene evoked a fated wisdom in the student."

sing MĨR, idea-tol, Achilles-POSS rage, Peleus-son, mũrderous, mũrderer, þadeath-kated; sing nõw-DEF rage this-DEF 3SG-ERG Achaean-INẼSS mãny þagod person-PL INÃN-hit-CAUS-WIT and mãny bvital soul-PL þadownward cave Hades-homẽ-ILL ANĨM-float-CAUS-CAUS-WIT
"Sing, O Muse, of the rage of Achilles, of Peleus' son, murderous, man-killer, fated to die, sing of the rage that cost the Achaeans so many good men and sent so many vital, hearty souls down to the dreary House of Death."

Nĩli þadórumũ hérege þadórunũnũ aórumõmũ hã?
"My child is sleeping here by the lamp, wow!"

taħórumũvórumãnũ séliru kélirili dzúrã lúmũralu izamĩmĩ.
In April, the blue ocean is very beautiful.

Pobarumũbo nṍlumũlu mãzumũgo abúrumũvarumũmũ.
"Two dogs jump over the lazy cat."

Tege tarumũdarumũ po ubarumãmũ hére italimĩmĩ "kogo mṍzulu tírimĩ" hére karunũgo inẽ́mĩmĩ lú?
Did he raise both fists and say ‘to hell with this’ and let the rock roll?

sérimĩnĩzéradarimã-ko-o tógoru-tógoru i-dézimĩ-mĩ térenĩ xéliri i-sérimĩ-li


Shúyalu rénã mãnãrulu sélimĩli dzarumũ uvónãmũ.
"The nuanced rhythm of the song evoked a fated wisdom."

Héré dzarunũbarolunũ izhíynĩmĩ, nĩ súmũrunũ aórumõmũ.
If it rains on the riverbank, I sleep in my bed.

fúzu xélirili þadórumã~dórumã-ko-o Yúbuysuy-lu i-sérimĩ-dérimĩ-mĩ sélimĩ-nũ


dzalumãvazumũ þadórumũgo nẽbarimĩlimĩ kérimĩli þabadu izalamĩ.
"The hungry child bit the sweet bread quietly."

Hére teli þadénĩdénĩli izérimĩdérimĩmẽ, dzérenĩ þadórumãdórumãgo tege tírimĩ ufórumũgomõ.
"When our classes are finished, many students will celebrate together."

Héré nĩ pogadi bvarivarili nẽ́rimĩnẽdérimĩdérimĩgemẽ, nĩẽ qanãrã ivalumũnẽ.
"If I haven't mastered this in forty years, I won't enjoy karaoke."

Kórumũnũ qadingérenãnĩ þadórumãdórumã izamĩmĩ.
"There are 25 students in the classroom."

taħarogo mãzumũ arúzumũzubumũ.
"The crow made the cat run for its own benefit."

Þadórumãgo dzérenĩri sélimĩ þadénĩmĩli ubúlumũmũ þadézari idézimĩmĩ.
"The student who walks to school every day needs homework."

dzúradórumãgo panũrunũ pogadingérebe mṍlurumṍluru uparumãmũ.
"The scholar has forty-two books in the library."

Hére dzalumã inĩ́zamĩmĩ, mãzumũgo uzólumũmũ.
"The cat sits while it smells the food."

Nĩẽ bvórulunũ lúmũralu túrumũ ibarimĩmĩ héré mãnãrumãmã.
I heard a beautiful bird in the park while it was singing.

Nĩẽ mṹrudógorugo þagénĩ túrumũgo avérimãmĩ.
"I saw a bird with my binoculars."

Mṹranũsparazúradórumãgo dzérimĩnẽli þabarunã igérimĩmĩ.
"The doctor examined the weak animal."

Mãlalunũnũlu Mãguzúrazóronãrago dzérenĩ mãlalu kólogólo ubarumãmũ.
"The rich emperor possesses many golden rings."

Nẽ́rimĩge bvórã xélirige dzérenĩ tamõdórumã uvóruzamũ.
"The raw truth of the ending surprised even the seasoned critics."

Nĩẽ bvórulunũ kóru tabúlumũ avérimãmĩ.
I saw six foxes in the park.

Hére mṍgo aórumõmĩ, pórumũgo kélirinã bvérizi ubúrumĩnũ izéralimĩ.
"While the world sleeps, the owl reflects on the mystery of the stars."

Kogonõvaruzulu nĩ́mã sam nãmĩspíranĩ izéradimĩ.
"Otherwise, the ghost remains in the empty prison."

Kogonõ súzu qalalã izamĩmĩ, sórumũ mṹranũzómũt udólumũmũ.
"Although the frame composition was grand, the story lacked heart."

Palodã lúmũralu þadórumũgo bvórumã uvalumũmũ.
"The child whose skin is soft enjoys the spring."

Nĩẽ fúramũnũ xúbaru ugóruamũzuzumũ.
"I had (the engineers) make the satellite during the race."

Púrumũlu mṍzumãgarugo mĩlinẽzeħrisnĩ xélirinĩ ubúrumũmũ.
"The deceitful enemy hid the truth in the dark cave."

Hére nĩ nĩli þagérigéri tírimĩ mãrunũlu þabóromũmũ, nĩẽ téziri ufalumũmũ.
"When I go to the market with my friends, I enjoy tea."

Swidige tóralugóruamãgo mĩlinẽzeħrisnĩ mṍz uvónãmũ.
"The Swedish director evokes terror in the cave."

Tímẽ nẽ́rili tóralugo uvalumũmũ lú?
"Did you like that new movie?"

Nĩẽ fúramũnũ xúbaru ugóruamũzuzumũ.
"I had the engineers make the satellite during the race."

Teli nṹmãgo þadómũrunũ nĩzã nẽ́rili súmũrumṹru idézimĩmĩ.
Our family needs eight new beds in the house.

Þadórumãgo dzérenĩri sélimĩ þadénĩmĩli ubúlumũmũ þadézari idézimĩmĩ.
"The student who walks to school every day needs homework."

Mṹranũsparazúradórumãgo dzérimĩnẽli þabarunã igérimĩmĩ.
"The doctor examined the weak animal."

Pozúradórumãõ bvarigadingérelúnã kélirinãvélirinã i-qérimĩ-dérimĩ-mĩ.
"Two scholars finished counting ninety-nine stars."

Þadarumõdórumãgo xóronũnũ izérimĩdérimĩmĩ.
"The hunter mastered the field."

dzúravórunũ dzúragúrago mĩ́ranĩnẽ́rizibalarã ulórumũmũ.
"The ancient teacher carried the silver metal weapon."

Nĩẽ sadumũ dzamĩrizélimĩnĩ bvézi qílimĩri fúramũ arúzamũmũ.
"I ran a 10 kilometre race last weekend."

héré palumũnãrumãgo tórumõ udórumũgo, nṹmã avérimĩgemẽ.
"If the athlete wins, the family will celebrate."

bvómã nãrumãnãrumãgo lúmũralu mṍgonũ azéradimĩ.
"Sixty-four million people live in this beautiful world."

Palumũdórumãgo þabírã qílimĩri rómũrunũ arúzamũmũ.
"The athlete ran fifteen kilometers on the island."

Nĩ teli mṹranũzómũdoshmṹranũzómũdoshdã bvórumã angaramãmĩ.
"Our hearts welcome the spring."

Swidige tóralugóruamã mĩ́ranũnẽ́rili dzérenĩ tóralutóralu ugóruamũmũ.
"The Swedish director makes a lot of movies about death."

Lúnã mãnãrumãnãru idérimĩdérimĩmẽ.
"It seems nineteen songs have been mastered."

Mãguzúrazóronãrage xélirili súnãruzanõmũlu mãguzúrazóronãrã izamĩmĩ!
"The only emperor is the emperor of ice cream!"

dzúradórumãgo tézimĩli bvólumũdógoru udórumũmũ panũrulu þabóromũlu.
"The scholar used the silver key to enter the library."

Lízire kérimĩli élege þadonũbanũ spíranĩ unãzaluzo azérimĩzizimĩ?
"Who taught the bright swan to dance in the museum's dome?"

Nũlóradago bvézingangali rélamãrélamã unãrumũmũlu dzérimĩdérimãli izamĩmĩ.
"My hand is tired from writing thirty poems."

Shúyã bvóramũ sórumũnãrumãgo sórumũ dzórazalu izérimĩmĩ.
"A subtle evolution of the character ensures the story remains extraordinary."

Héré fazumũgo uvóvumãmũ, dzanguru þaglízali izamĩgemẽ.
If the sun rises, the planet will apparently be shining.

Tege nṹmãgaru bvérizinĩ azhudórumũ þadézimĩ.
"They should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood."

Þadórumã nẽ́ridedage igérimĩmĩ.
"The student's leg aches."

Þadórumãgo udórumõdórumãmũ bvarudógorugo kízanĩ izamĩmĩ.
"The mirror that the student broke was in the kitchen."

Héré kélirivérizi þagórumãlu samĩmĩ, nĩẽ kóvunũnũ qírimĩgírimĩ ubúmãmũ.
"If the weather (sky-way) is good, I cultivate flowers in the garden."

Xanãdunũ Kúblay Kango mãguzulu kalimãspírã talimĩdérimĩmĩ.
"In Xanadu did Kublai Khan, a stately pleasure-dome decree."

Mãguzúrazóronãrago xúbaru fazumãgo ivérimãzibimẽ.
"Apparently, the emperor had the satellite monitor the storm for the people's benefit."

Hére nĩ þadénĩmĩlu ubúlumũmũ, nĩẽ nĩli téramĩ izéralimĩ.
"When I walk to school, I think about my dream."

Héré dzúradórumãgo mẽ́gevélamĩ idarimĩmĩ, mṍgo nẽ́rili lórumã izérimĩgemẽ.
"If the scholar's ambition grows, the world will learn a new language."

bvanũguvanũ ishíynĩmĩ hére, þadórumãdórumãgo spíranĩ palumũmũ.
"Because it is raining in Vancouver, the children play in the room."

Þadóravago þadóranãrumã þabaluru ugazumũ uvarumũzunõmõ.
"Apparently, the system does not let the user repair the bridge."

Fúzu þadórumãdórumãgo nẽbarimĩlimĩ panũrunũ mãgedérenĩ inẽ́rimĩmĩ.
"Twelve students wait in the quiet library for the new map."

dzérimĩdérimãli palumũdórumãgo fúramũlo túzumã idézimĩmĩ.
"The tired athlete needs water after the race.’

Xaru taħarumgo þabóħrunũ taħarogo shíynĩmĩli adarumũmũ.
"The red hawk chased the black crow into the mist."

Lízireo sérimĩnĩzéradarimã bvarigadi lédalédã ibérimĩzizimĩ?
"Who made the researcher review eighty papers?"

kóru kóvanũlu polunãmõrago séli mãrugunũ abúlumũmũ.
"Six green lizards walk separately on the dry road."

Hére nĩ nĩli þagérigéri tírimĩ kanãralu þabóromũmũ, nĩẽ kogo uvalumũmũ.
"When I go to karaoke with my friends, I enjoy it."

Hére nĩ tege tírimĩ þabaluru ivírimĩmĩ, dzarunũ fúdurulu imẽ́zimĩmĩ.
"While we build the bridge together, the river flows quickly."

Nĩẽ dzérenĩri kúrumũvórumãnũ téziri inĩzimĩmĩ.
"I drink tea every morning."

Nĩ dzérenĩri bvórumãnũ qalalã dzeħris lagã udúramũ.
"I hike the grand mountain trail every spring."

dzérenĩri nãrumãnãrumãgo mṹranũlu hére sólunũlu bvérizinĩ umṹranũtórumũmũ.
"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights."

Shís mṍzunõlu palumũdórumãgo pegadivézi qílimĩri fúramũsparanũ arúzamũmũ.
"Sixteen brave athletes run fifty kilometers in the stadium."

Hére nĩ tege ivírimĩmĩ qege lórumãlu, nĩ tege izérimĩmĩ xérali lórumã, tírimĩ idarimĩ spírali.
"As we build this language, let us ensure that it is expressive, while also having room to grow."

Nĩẽ tímẽge xarolugharon idémẽnĩmĩ, héré tímẽ kavuru inãzimĩmĩ.
"I judge your rage to be because you refused coffee."

Mãguzúrago halu bvónũmã azalumũgomõ.
"I see that the President will eat thirteen pieces of fruit."

Travumũdógoru nẽ́rimĩli samĩmĩli þadórumãdórumãgo tórunũ udólumũmũ.
"Because the bus was late, the students missed the quiz."

Þagarrette þagénĩ nĩ tege dzéranĩ agérimĩmĩ, hére kogo dzúrã sólurulu izamĩmĩ.
"Thank you, Garrett, for always helping us."

Nĩdige aimĩ þadóravã mṍgo sélimĩ igérimĩzimĩ.
"We (inclusive) made the AI system calculate the fate of the world."

Nĩẽ pélanĩgénĩ fúzu dzangurumṹru ivérimãmĩ.
I saw twelve planets with the telescope.

Teli panũrunũ þadórunũ lúmũralu izamĩmĩ.
"The lamp in our library is beautiful."

